Jordi Becerril Enriquez
November 01, 2024
evaluating combinations


- One of the goals in this chapter is to isolate issues about thinking 
procedurally. 

- In evaluating combinations, the interpreter is itself following a procedure.

-- To evaluate a combination, do the following:

1. Evaluate the subexpression of the combination.

2. Apply the procedure that is the value of the leftmost subexpression (the operator)
to the arguments that are the values of the other subexpressions (the operands). 



---
(+ 2(* 3 4))

-- Step 1: evaluate the subexpressions
- the operator +: is recognized as the addition procedure in Scheme. 
- the first argument 2: is a literal number, so it evaluates to itself, 2. 
- the second argument (* 3 4): this is another combination, so we need to recursively 
apply the same two step process to it:
  - Recursive evaluation of (* 3 4):
  - 1. Evaluate the subexpresions of (* 3 4)
  - the operator *: is recognized as the multiplication procedure.
  - the first argument 3: evaluates to 3.
  - the second argument 4: evaluates to 4.

  - 2. Apply the procedure:
  - now that we know * is the operator and 3 and 4 are the arguments, we apply * to 3 
  and 4, which gives us 12. 

-- Step 2: apply the operator to the operands
- finally, we apply + to the arguments 2 and 12, which gives us the result 14.
---



Even this simple rule illustrates some important points about processes in general.

Firt, observe that the first step dictates that in order to accomplish the evaluation 
process for a combination we must first perform the evaluation process on each element 
of the combination. 

Thus, the evaluation rule is recursive in nature; that is, it includes, as one of
its steps, the need to invoke the rule itself.

Notice how succintcly the ideea of recursion can be used to express what, in the case
of a deeply nested combination, would otherwise be viewed as a rather complicated 
process.

For example, evaluating:
--
(* (+ 2 (* 4 6))
   (+ 3 5 7))
--
requires that the evaluation rule be applied to four different combinations. We can
obtain a picture of this process by representing the combination in the form of a tree.

---
Figure: 1.1
                 390
           /  \         \
          *    26         15
             / \ \      / | | \
            +  2  24   +  3 5  7
                 / | \ 
                *  4  6
---

Each combination is represented by a node with branches corresponding to the operator and
the operands of the combination stemming from it.



Next, observe that the repeated application of the first step brings us to the point
where we need to evaluate, not combinations, but primitive expresions such as numberals,
built-in operators, or other names. We take care of the primitive cases by stipulating
that:

- the value of numerals are the numbers that they name

- the values of built-in operators are the machine instructions 
sequences that carry out the corresponding operations, and

- the values of other names are the objects associated with those names in the environment


We may regard the second rule as a special case of the third one by stipulating
that symbols such as + and * are also included in the global environment, and are
associated with the sequence of machine instructions that are their "values".
The key point to notice is the role of the environment in determining the meaning
of the symbols in expressions. 

In an interactive language such as Lisp, it is meaningless to speak of the value 
of an expression such as (+ x 1) without specifiying any information about the 
environment that would provide a meaning for the symbol x (or even for the symbol +). 
As we shall see later, the general notion of the environment as providing a context in 
which evaluation takes place will play an important role in our understanding of 
program execution.


Notice that the evaluation rule given above does not handle definitions. 
For instance, evaluating (define x 3) does not apply define to two arguments,
one of which is the value of the symbol x and the other of which is 3, since
the purpose of the define is precisely to associate x with a value.
(That is, (define x 3) is not a combination.)

Such exceptions to the general evaluation rule are called special forms.
define is the only example of a sepcial form that we have seen so far,
but we will meet others shortly. 

Each special form has its own evaluation rule. The various kinds of 
expressions (each with its associated evaluation rule) constitue the syntax 
of the programming language. In comparision with most other programming languages, 
Lisp has a very simple syntax; that is, the evaluation rule for expressions can be described
by a simple general rule together with specialized rules for a small number of special forms.
