Jordi Becerril Enriquez
November 05, 2024
Expressions


- One easy way to get started at programming is to examine some typical
interactions with an interpreter for the Scheme dialect of Lisp.

- you type an expression, and the interpreter responds by displaying the 
result of its evaluating that expression.

- one kind of primitive expression you might type is a number.

- if you present Lisp with a number:
486
the interpreter will respond by printing:
486




Expressions representing numbers may be combined with an expression
representing a primitive procedure (such as + or *) to form a compound
expression that represents the application of the procedure to those numbers.
For example:

(+ 137 349)
486

(- 1000 334)
666

(* 5 99)
495

(/ 10 5)
2

(+ 2.7 10)
12.7


Expressions such as these, formed by delimiting a list of expressions
within parentheses in order to denote procedure application, are called
combinations. 

- The leftmost element in the list is called the operator, and the other
elements are called operands.

- The value of a combination is obtained by applying the procedure specified 
by the operator to the arguments that are the values of the operands.


The Convention of placing the operator to the left of the operands is known
as prefix notation, and it may be somewhat confusing at first because it 
departs significantly from the customary mathematical convention.
Prefix notation has several advantages, however.

- One of them is that it can accommodate procedures that may take an
arbitrary number of arguments, as in the following examples:

(+ 21 35 12 7)
75

(* 25 4 12)
1200


No ambiguity can arise, because the operator is always the left most
element and the entire combination is delimited by the parentheses.

- A second advantage of prefix notation is that it extends in a straight
forward way to allow combinations to be nested, that is, to have combinations
whose elements are themselves combinations:

(+ (* 3 5) (- 10 6))
19

There is no limit (in principle) to the depth of such nesting and to overall
complexity of the expressions that the Lisp interpreter can evaluate.
It is we humans who get confused by still reletively simple expresions such 
as:
(+ (* 3 (+ (* 2 4) (+ 3 5))) (+ (- 10 7) 6))

which the interpreter would readily evaluate to be 57. We can help ourselvs
by writing such an expression in the form:

(+ (* 3 
      (+ (* 2 4) 
          (+ 3 5))) 
   (+ (- 10 7) 
      6))

following a formatting convention known as pretty-printing, in which 
each long combination is written so that the operands are well aligned
vertically. The resulting indentations display clearly the structure of the
expression.


Even with complex expressions, the interpreter always operates in
the same basic cycle: 
- it reads an expression from the terminal
- evaluates the expression
- prints the result

This mode of operation is often expressed by saying that the interpreter runs 
in a read-eval-print loop.



