Jordi Becerril Enriquez
November 08, 2024
The Substitution Model for Procedure Applicaiton


- To evaluate a combination whose operator names a compound procedure,
the interpreter follows much the same process as for combinations whose
operators name primitive procedures.

That is, the interpreter evaluates the elements of the combination and applies
the procedure (which is the value of the operator of the combination) to the
arguments (which are the values of the operands of the combination).


We can assume that the mechanism for applying primitive procedures to
arguments is built into the interpreter. For compound procedures, the
applicatoin process is as follows:

- to apply a compound procedure to agruments, evaluate the body of the procedure 
with each formal parameter replaced by the corresponding argument.

To illustrate this process, let's evaluate the combination:
(f 5)

where f is the procedure defined in "Section 1.1.4". We begin by retrieving
the body of f:

(sum-of-squares (+ a 1) (* a 2))

Then we replace the formal parameter a by the argument 5:

(sum-of-squares (+ 5 1) (* 5 2))

Thus the problem reduces to the evaluation of a combination with two operands 
and an operator sum-of-squares. Evaluating this combination invloves three
subproblems. 

We must evaluate the operator to get the procedure to be applied,  
and we must evalute the operands to get the arguments. 

- now (+ 5 1) produces 6 
- and (* 5 2) produces 10

so we must apply the sum-of-squares procedure to 6 and 10. These values
are substituted for the formal parameters x and y in the body of
sum-of-squares, reducing the expression to:

(+ (* 6 6) (* 10 10))

which reduces by multiplication to:

(+ 36 100)

and finally to:
136


- The process we have just described is called the "substitution model" for
procedure application. It can be taken as a model that determines the "meaning"
of procedure applicaiton, insofar as the procedures in this chapter are concerned.
However, there are two points that should be stressed:

- the purpose of the substitution is to help us think about procedure application,
not to provide a description of how the interpreter really works.

- over the course of this book, we will be presented with a sequence of increasinly 
elaborate models of how interpreters work...
The substitution model is only the first of these models-a way to get started thinking 
formally about the evaluation process.







